---
layout: post
title: "JAGS and R online"
category: 'Tool'
---

General information
-------------------

You will need to use JAGS and other probabilistic software in this course. Here are the steps to do this:

- Go to this: address [http://tinyurl.com/oldrobot](http://tinyurl.com/oldrobot) Make sure to use a standard laptop-sized screen and a relatively recent browser. **Note: the website will open on Monday March 2nd, during the class time.**
- Create an account **where your username should be your student id** (if your student id is not in our database for some reason, send us a private message in Piazza). Note: do not use the same password as you use for important services, since it is not encrypted.
- Once you are logged in, you can look at the ``tutorials`` to get familiar with JAGS and the online tool. 
- Then go in the assignment tab and start by clicking ``Take assignment``. 
- **Make sure you click on ``Commit`` often to save your work!**

Quick reference
---------------

Some quick references for convenience (see the tutorials for more context and information). The notation in JAGS is fairly similar to standard mathematical notation, but with some slight differences.

#### Discrete distributions (PMFs)

- Bernoulli: ``dbern(p)``
- Binomial: ``dbin(p, n)``
- Categorical: ``dcat(p)`` 
- Poisson: ``dpois(lambda)``
- Geometric: ``dnegbin(p, 1)`` *support is $0, 1, 2, \dots$*
- Negative Binomial: ``dnegbin(p, r)`` *support is $0, 1, 2, \dots$*

#### Continuous distributions (PDFs)

- Uniform: ``X ~ dunif(a, b)``
- Normal: ``X ~ dnorm(mu,1/sigma^2)`` *uses the inverse of the variance, a parameter called the precision*
- Exponential: ``X ~ dexp(lambda)`` *rate parameterization*
- Gamma: ``X ~ dgamma(alpha, lambda)`` *shape-rate parameterization*

#### Useful functions

- Absolute value: ``abs(x)``
- Exponential: ``exp(x)``
- Conditional: ``ifelse(x,a,b)``
- Logarithm (base e): ``log(x)``
- Square root: ``sqrt(x)``
- Maximum: ``max(x, y)`` *works on vectors and/or more than two arguments*
- Minimum: ``min(x, y)``
- Sum: ``sum(x)`` *sums the elements in the vector x*


Additional readings
-----------------

To get detailed information: 

- [Complete reference](http://blue.for.msu.edu/CSTAT_13/jags_user_manual.pdf),
- How it works under the hood: [tutorial on MCMC](http://videolectures.net/mlss09uk_murray_mcmc/),
- A book on using JAGS to build Bayesian models: "Doing Bayesian Data Analysis: A Tutorial with R and BUGS", John Kruschke.